Test, test, test.
While we're talking to Mr. John Richardson, the author of what everybody is saying, I mean, they're comparing this with Ellman's Joyce and the great biography of Goethe, and that's pretty heavy company.
I know.
I mean, nobody was more surprised than me.
I was absolutely delighted by this.
I guess what it strikes out for me as a professional reader, I guess, is
your concept of what a biography is.
I mean, obviously it's more than the life, and it's the work, and you're not afraid to bring in gossip where necessary, but it seems to have to have a pertinence.
Maybe if you could just address yourself to what your perception of biography is.
Well, I think one's perception of biography changes according to the subject.
I mean, you're not going to approach the biography of Braque in the same way as you're going to approach the biography of Picasso.
Braque's case, you could write about Braque
without really referring to his life at all, apart from his war wound in the First World War.
And that's about it.
And you could write a very illuminating work about him.
Picasso, the work and the life are so enmeshed that you can't really, to my mind, understand the one without constant reference to the other.
And especially right at the end when the...
creative process and the procreative process become so enmeshed and as he becomes impotent he leads a kind of sexual life in his work and the painter who's presumably himself is painting a nude but he's actually sort of tickling the nipples of the nude with his brush
and um so it's all totally i can get this quote in my feet but it's so enmeshed the whole thing so um i i don't have any specific biographical approach um in general but i have a very specific biographical approach to picasso and um which is to do with this um um
the way his life and his work are, you have to understand the one to know it, to understand the other.
So, to really understand the work, in your view, one must understand the light.
I therefore assume that you're constantly being surprised by what you learn, as well as you know the work.
I'm constantly being surprised.
No, you absolutely did, right.
And also, surprised by... I should have read a question.
But surprised by these always even greater than I'd imagined.
I mean, it's more complex, it's more interesting, it's more imaginative, it's more original.
And you suddenly find a whole lot of drawings which you've never really looked into before.
And when you look into them, I mean, they just are extraordinary.
Oh, there, thank you.
Oh, great, thank you.
Thank you very much.
And then I have to cite all people, critics who, semiologists and others, who see biography as not being respectable and that you have to see an artist's work completely without reference to anything else.
Biographical details are of no importance, no interest.
and um uh i think that's ridiculous well i think it's absolute rubbish but especially in picasso's case i mean i think that as i say i know there's a whole essence of new criticism yeah and you know that you totally separate the life from the work yeah and you know you just read the text is all yeah how can you possibly understand the text without no i mean i don't know yes above all with with um i don't know a writer like
Hemingway, I mean, you've got to understand his life, it seems to me.
I mean, I can see that there are certain poets who you could see in isolation from their life, but Babo Picasso you cannot see, but it doesn't stop the semiologists getting after me.
Is it fair to call this an autobiographical form of art then?
The art that he produces?
Yes, well, he always said,
that my work is like a diary, which is exactly what you're saying.
And I used to see a lot of Picasso really roughly in the 50s, but I used to go on seeing him into the 60s.
And his wife would cook a dish of eels for him for lunch one day,
and you'd see a painting of Eels the following day.
I mean, this is a rather simplistic image, but... It's quite telling, actually.
But, I mean, it was so... It's sort of... I mean, this pattern repeats itself again and again and again, except that Picasso liked to see himself as a prophet.
And I arrived at the studio one day, and there was an ink wash
a painting of Jacqueline, his wife.
And on the back, big black image, and the back of it was like fever chart lines, and sort of a terrible fever chart, pink, you know, and yellow and so on, zigzag, zigzag, all over the background.
And he said, look, I'm a prophet.
I mean, I did this painting of Jacqueline, drawing of Jacqueline, and three days later, she had a temperature of heaven knows what.
And I didn't like to say, well, she's a very susceptible woman,
And if you paint her as if she's having a fever, she's going to obediently get a fever.
And so there's that aspect.
Picasso saw art as having a magic function.
And he could control people through his work.
He could seduce women through his work.
He could get rid of women through his work.
He could, if he wanted, show
his current mistress that there was another one by starting bringing them you know the images of her becoming i don't know brunette one side blonde the other and um yes no i mean yes i mean and um and as he himself said with a certain satisfaction it must be terrible for a woman to
Certainly you knew so much about the man and his art when you started.
Did you feel that you had a concept of what this biography was going to be?
No.
Or has it just been an adventure as much as it is for the reader?
Yeah.
I mean, I just wanted to tell the story the way it was and to impose no particular theories on it.
I mean, I just wanted...
and just to see what happened, you know, the moment I got into it.
And somehow, as I'd known him well, or at an old age, I knew what it must have been like when he was much younger.
But I can never get too far ahead of myself.
I mean, it was no good even having research, doing research ahead of myself, because it's so dense and so complex that I just, you know,
August 1912, I had to stick there and then go on to September and so on.
But when you're writing now, you did a key decade here.
Have you seen the life whole?
I mean, you have the four volumes in mind here, or are you really just kind of researching these segments?
Well, I'm just forging ahead, you know, and slowly, you know.
In terms of interpreting now when you're writing a volume, though, you still don't see the life whole, do you, at this particular point, or do you?
Yeah, I mean, having, especially as I knew him at the end of his life, I mean, I can see I'm heading towards that time, and everything's coming together all the time.
And, I mean, there are surprises, as I said, in the quality of the work and the imaginative power of the work, but there are not really many surprises when, I mean, when I unearth something completely new, I think, oh my God, you know, this fits, this bit of the puzzle fits in so well.
And I think intuitively I know what I'm... I don't want to impose any pattern, any theoretical pattern on his life.
I mean, I just want to... And it just comes together in some... As a biography, I can honestly think of no other that contains so many illustrations where the visual record is just so much part of the text.
I think in terms of biographies in general.
At first glance, people who know nothing about this might think it's an art book, which it is, but this is really... Well, the text is paramount here, of course, but the illustrations... But also the illustrations are small, and they're not particularly beautiful.
And they're duotone, they're not colour.
But, I mean, they're ready to, like a lecture, you know, that the slides sort of, you know, keep you... It accompanies the text, so to speak.
And I get furious when people write and say, why the hell didn't you have any colour plates?
And A, the book would be twice, three times expensive, and also it would become something else.
It would become an art book, as opposed to a biography.
I mean, I want to keep it as a biography.
And that is the point, the colour plates is something else again.
Any number of...
Art books on Picasso where one can go to get the reproductions of the... And I don't want to be a... Bobo, I don't want it to be a coffee table book.
You know, the people flip through the nice kind of illustrations.
I want it to be a biography.
Did you... Apparently this began as a two-blogging project, isn't it, right?
So it had to be better.
By the time I was sort of a quarter of the way through the first volume, I was going to have to be a fourth volume.
Somehow the life imposed a certain speed, a certain, actually not speed, a certain slowness on me.
And I just couldn't do it any other way.
I mean, I just had... I was comfortable at this sort of rather slow pace.
And...
I couldn't do it any quicker.
I couldn't do it any shorter.
And if this was going to be a one-volume condensed version of four volumes, somebody else is going to have to do it because I couldn't ever do it.
They did that to Leonie Dell's Henry James.
They did it.
Wasn't Carlos Baker's
The biography of Henry Waite?
No, but Blatner's biography of Prockner was two volumes, I think.
So, I mean, it's done.
But you're willing, certainly, to allow someone else.
Do you have a timetable for this?
I have, but I don't keep to it.
I mean, I'm 72, and the first one took six years.
The second one took five years.
With any luck, the next one will take four years.
It's only like the fourth one will take three years.
But I don't know if this is measurably larger than volume one.
No, yeah, not a... Oh, it's a little happier.
It is a little happier.
It's fine with me.
I love big books.
My own book is 638 pages.
I'm... I mean, the next volume is going to be... I mean, the classical period and surrealism, and then political involvement, and...
And also, he becomes a poet.
And the poetry, I mean, it's fascinating.
And this Lydia Gassman, whose name I gave you, is the great authority on Picasso's poetry.
How so much of the material, the source material that you have consulted, has been totally unexamined prior to the development, I think, isn't that right?
Yeah, I was lucky in one way.
I mean, everybody said there are so many other biographies.
Why do another?
There hadn't been a serious biography since Picasso died.
So I could say a whole lot of things which other people couldn't say, especially if you were a friend or close to him.
I mean, Roland Penrose's pioneer biography is excellent, but he was such a friend of Picasso's.
It suffers from a total lack of shadows.
I mean, it's a great breakthrough book, but it's
You know, I could put in the shadows, and I could put in the details, and I think see him more dispassionately.
And I loved him, but I'm not blinded by this to his many faults.
Of course, he's dead now, what, 23 years?
Yeah.
And so distance helps a little bit, too, doesn't it?
Yes.
And how many terms of it?
Lord, yes, yeah.
I would think so.
And also more stuff comes out.
The reputation continues to grow.
Would you agree with that?
I think so, yeah.
Very much so.
I mean, there was a dip just around the time he died.
And then it sort of, very recently, it's just taken off and it's much... How do you explain that?
I think that often happens, doesn't it?
I mean, he'd lived so long.
I think people, you know, thought...
that the late work is very difficult to take.
It was very, I mean, it could be seen as being clumsy and, yeah, and too quick, and as if he was sort of racing death, you know, in this race with death.
Explain the subtitle, The Painter of Modern Life.
If you read the first chapter, it'll become, you'll see why.
When I did come to write about the Demoiselle, I did it at the end, I mean, because I just couldn't climb Everest, you know.
After you climbed Everest, you climbed Everest.
So I then got back to the Demoiselle and I thought, how the hell am I going to find a new angle on the Demoiselle?
Because it had been so written about.
And then I remembered, I shared a house, well I knew Picasso well, I shared a house with a man called Douglas Cooper, who was a great collector of Cubist paintings.
And Picasso used to come a lot to the house.
And he's very generous, he usually used to come
with a present of some kind, until he one day arrived with a kilo of caviar and said, you know, those drawings are getting so valuable.
Here's a kilo of caviar.
And he soon resumed giving drawings.
Anyway, for Douglas's 48th birthday, he arrived with a drawing for the Demoiselle d'Avignon.
And on the back was a drawing of Fernand in a kind of rather fashionable wasp-waisted outfit, which is holding up.
You don't see from the drawing, but you know from other drawings, a parasol.
And I asked Picasso whether there was any connection between the Demoiselle and this drawing.
And he said, not really.
The reason was, halfway through working on the Demoiselle, I put it aside because I wanted to do a composition of carriages in the Bois de Boulogne.
And this was a sketch.
There was going to be Fernand in the front with a parasol, carriages in the back.
And there were two or three other drawings of carriages and so forth.
And I started thinking about this, thinking, what the hell was he doing?
Doing his... Yeah, Demoiselle, with a Bois de Boulogne carriages.
And I thought, Constantin Guisse was the great painter of the Bois de Boulogne.
And my God, Constantin Guisse was also a great painter of brothels.
And, of course, there's a great Baudelaire essay called Le Peintre de la Vie Moderne.
which is about Constantin Guise, but also applies very much to Manet.
So I reread that, and the scales fell from my eyes, because Baudelaire, this was written, what, 60 years before the Demoiselle, Baudelaire describes this painting, the Demoiselle d'Avignon, which is done 60 years later.
And there is this wonderful, wonderful description, which is in there, of how the greatest subject for a modern painter is either the whorehouse,
or the carriages in the Bois de Boulogne, and that this is what the painter of modern life is going to do, that postulated these two subjects.
And I suddenly realised that Picasso had... Oh, and then I found out that the pioneer book on Constantinople Guise had come out in 1905, that Picasso had done a drawing after one of the plates, and that in this pioneer book, a lot of Baudelaire's essay was quoted.
And so suddenly I see Picasso, Picasso seeing himself as Baudelaire's painter of modern life.
Wow.
And which was a sort of revelation.
And I thought this was so interesting that I called it the painter of modern life.
And friends have said, well, it's a boring title.
I mean, of course he was a painter of modern life.
But that's what it was all about.
Yeah.
But to go back to your earlier observations,
If you were to follow these rigid lines where you're not supposed to incorporate the life into the art, that wouldn't be relevant at all.
But it's so relevant when you think about it.
And also, people keep on talking about eros and finautos and all these other theories that it's about sexual trauma.
It may well be about that.
But this is a much greater...
bigger interpretation because it allows for other interpretations.
Even in Cuba's painting, he's very much, there are just false sorts of references to things, very contemporary, the right brothers.
Yeah, oh yes.
Contemporary songs.
Yeah, yeah.
So it fits.
And no one, to my knowledge, has made this correlation ever before.
No, I must say,
Bill Rubin, who I was rather dreading what he was going to say because we're kind of rivals in a way, and I was treading on him.
He regards the Demoiselle as his turp.
Well, he and Steinberg.
This is their turp.
Keep off.
Do you encounter much of that, you know?
Oh, God.
With Leo Steinberg, ooh.
You're invading, you know.
Yes.
When I pointed out that the Demoiselle was the same size as the great, more or less the same size as the great El Greco,
of the apocalypse in the Metropolitan Museum, and I found out that that painting was hanging in Zuluaga, a painter's studio, in Montmartre, when the Demoiselle was being painted.
And because I had access to it, and the composition is very, very close to it, it's all in there too, Leo Steinberg was absolutely outraged.
How dare I suggest this?
Obviously, you're never worried of this subject.
This is really going to occupy at least 20 years of your life.
But you think about it, sure, easily.
But you haven't weary of it.
John is halfway through, though.
I'm not wearying of the subject, but weary.
How much time we got?
A minute or two.
All right, you better run them down.
I guess just would you call it a sympathetic biography?
You know what I'm saying?
Well, I think it's... I mean, he certainly knew the man, and you had affection for him, I guess.
Yeah.
But I've tried to sort of see things in a certain detachment, and as you say, dispassionate.
And I think I would see... At least the reviewers said... Well, no question, but I'm just wondering about, you know, you don't come to this with any... Well, what kind of baggage do you come to the project?
Let's approach it...
With, well, with... Predisposition, shall we say, as a point, maybe that's a better word.
Well, I mean, a passion for the painting.
I mean, I have a total, total passion for the painting, and I totally agree with... And that's essential, I think.
Yeah, and Picasso used to say, well, said to me anyway, there's no such thing as a bad Picasso.
Some are less good than others.
And I totally go along with that.
He said that?
Yes, yes.
Lack of ego was not his fulfilling, was it at all?
No.
But he's also capable of great modesty.
Yeah.
The difficulty is whatever you say about Picasso, the opposite is also true.
Which is wonderful.
Yeah, but it makes it difficult for the biographer.
And then just your attitude, your position on the use of gossip.
Very important.
You use it, and it's wonderful.
But tell me, did you set up any rules about where it applies and where it doesn't?
It was everything fair game, everything grist for themselves.
If I thought it illustrated a point or was relevant to the life of Barack or Picasso or cocktail, whatever it was.
It definitely goes in.
It goes in.
And also if it was true, you know, if I could check it, double check it.
I mean, or if it wasn't, if it was questionable, I'd say, I think I said, you know, so-and-so says this for what it's worth.
But if it's a good story, it gets in.
But what you've also done, for instance, in volume one... I quite agree with that.
...is in a few instances taken him off his pedestal, though, the whole... Oh, God, yes.
I mean, did you do me the honors before you go downstairs?
Here's my card.
The story about him in just a matter of a few hours from passing the entrance...
drawing entrance exams for various.
Now, I've got it.
I'd like to use my academy.
I missed your name, by the way.
Oh, I'm Val Bordingham.
Okay.
Well, they're going to have quite a show here.
A year from now.
Are you going to be coming up, sir?
Yeah, I certainly will.
Well, I'm quite delighted.
Oops.
I've got another one, which I...
I like, here we go.
I think I might try to say that Picasso himself likes to sort of perpetuate this amendment of passing these exams very quickly.
Yeah, well, Dr. Norton.
Well, I'll say, he's just going to... And the deeded to him the full time.
This is great.
This is a...
You saw the New York Times, of course, which declares this one of the truly great biographies.
There were three things in the Times, actually.
Yeah, but that full page in peace in the daily was just wonderful.
That's great.
Could you date it for me, too, sir, please?
Yeah, what is it?
It's 18.
It's the week before Christmas.
Great.